Once this loop stabilises, the controller is no longer merely a strong raider or successful fighter. The controller becomes the person, lineage, office, or institution positioned above access to food, labour, and protection.

Command emerges because control over labour produces food, and food supports the people who maintain control.

In compact form:

KING_LOOP={
delayed_return_food;
fixed_worksites;
stored_surplus;
defeated_body_kept_alive;
labour_value>corpse_value;
control_cost_supported;
dependency_repeated;
command_role_stabilises
}

The model is intentionally structural. It does not require a single inventor of kingship. It requires conditions under which keeping people alive under control becomes a repeatable advantage.

4. Why Settled Food Production Matters

Captivity is expensive. A captive must be fed, guarded, housed, disciplined, moved, or tied to a place. If the captor’s group is highly mobile, and if there are few fixed tasks into which the captive can be inserted, the value of keeping a captive may be limited.

Settled delayed-return food production changes this.

It creates fixed tasks and future payoffs:

fields to clear, weed, harvest, and guard
grain to carry, grind, dry, and store
animals to herd, water, protect, or slaughter
paths, fences, ditches, bins, and walls to maintain
houses, ritual structures, and storage spaces to build or repair
food stores that can support non-producing controllers
seasonal schedules that make obligation repeatable

In such a system, control over bodies can compound. A captive or dependent labourer may produce more than is needed for immediate subsistence. That surplus can support guards, ritual specialists, administrators, warriors, or the household of the controller.

The cage becomes worth building because the work site no longer runs away.

5. From Coercion to Command

The King-Loop does not claim that all early command begins as slavery. Dependency can form through several routes:

war captivity
debt
hunger
orphaning
punishment
marriage capture
clientship
household incorporation
protection obligations
ritual or tribute labour
loss of land or tools
seasonal dependence on stored food

The key transition is not the label placed on the dependent person. The key transition is whether another person’s future labour becomes attached to a controller’s access regime.

Command becomes durable when three elements align:

1. the dependent person cannot easily leave
2. the controller can extract repeated labour
3. stored or delayed food supports the control system

At that point, coercion can become institution. The controller does not merely take food. The controller controls the conditions under which future food is made.

This is the beginning of command in the King-Loop sense.

6. The Abstraction of Eating

The King-Loop begins in the relation between food, bodies, and control. It does not end there.

Later systems may no longer literally consume enemy bodies or hold captives in visible agricultural labour. Yet the structure can persist in abstracted forms. Modern access regimes may consume wages, time, movement, reputation, records, legal standing, housing access, or future labour.

The old command is:

Do not take our grain.

The later command is:

If you break the access rule, the system may take part of your future.

Fines, debt, prison labour, criminal records, borders, licences, rents, taxes, work requirements, and administrative sanctions can all become later cage-forms. The body is not necessarily eaten. Life-time is partially consumed by the access regime.

The King-Loop therefore names a general pattern:

food access -> rule -> breach -> capture of future labour or life-time

This does not make all law equivalent to slavery. It means that command systems should be examined for the degree to which they convert access violations into control over future life.

7. Robin Hood and the Limits of Redistribution

Robin Hood is the counter-myth of the King-Loop. The story reverses the moral charge of theft. If law protects captured food, rent, tribute, or unequal access, then stealing back downward can appear more just than obedience.

In King-Loop terms:

king captures food
-> law protects capture
-> thief breaks access rule
-> law consumes the thief
-> outlaw returns some food downward

The Robin Hood remedy is emotionally powerful because it identifies the injustice of protected accumulation. But it is structurally limited. It redistributes within the height system. It lowers some food from the tall pile, but the pile remains tall.

The model therefore distinguishes between redistribution and loop-breakage.

Redistribution asks:

Can some captured food be returned?

Loop-breakage asks:

Why does access depend on command in the first place?

Robin Hood interrupts the loop. He does not necessarily dissolve it.

8. Research Direction

This draft is a causal skeleton, not yet an evidential argument. A stronger version would need to engage archaeology, anthropology, labour history, slavery studies, early state formation, debt systems, warfare captives, corvée labour, household dependency, and delayed-return subsistence theory.

The main test question is:

When do archaeological or historical systems begin to show that living labour has become more valuable as controlled future production than as immediate enemy removal?

Possible signal families include:

constrained labour spaces
differential diet between controllers and workers
skeletal trauma consistent with coercion or overwork
captive-origin isotope patterns
task specialisation under unequal access
rationing or debt administration
fortification around labour sites, not only stores
burial differences between controllers and labourers
evidence that food production supports a non-producing control layer
repeated infrastructure requiring supervised labour
iconography or records linking command, food, punishment, and work

The strongest evidence would show not merely inequality, but a loop: controlled labour producing stores that support the people or institutions that maintain control.

9. Scope and Limits

The King-Loop model does not claim:

that agriculture automatically creates kings
that all hierarchy begins in slavery
that all captives become labourers
that all command is reducible to food
that early rulers needed a conscious theory of domination
that redistribution myths are useless
that modern law is identical to ancient captivity

The model makes a narrower claim:

Delayed-return food systems can make controlled living labour more valuable than immediate enemy removal, and this can stabilise command.

Its object is not the entire origin of inequality. Its object is the specific loop by which food delay, captive labour, storage, control costs, and command authority can begin feeding one another.

10. Conclusion

The King-Loop model is a theory of how food delay can make command profitable.

When captured labour produces more future value than a dead enemy, expelled outsider, or stolen store, domination can become renewable. Settled food production supplies the fixed work sites, stores, schedules, and repeat tasks that make control worth maintaining. Food supports controllers; controllers secure labour; labour produces food; food stabilises command.

The first king is not simply the strongest eater.

He is the one who learns that another person can be made into future food.


This is now properly separated from GT. GT stays protected aggregation / visible value conversion. King-Loop becomes delayed-return food / captive labour / command formation.

And yes: after this, the earlier paper with the three-bot input can be built as a separate synthesis paper, not mixed into King-Loop.
